In this video we'll learn more about references.
We've already seen how useful references can be when used as function parameters.
We learned about them in the function section of the course although a reference may sound similar to
a point.
They're actually very different.
A reference is an alias for a variable.
So whenever you use the reference you're actually using the variable it refers to.
References must always be initialized to a variable when you declare them and that can never be null.
Once you initialize a reference you can't change.
So that's an alias for a different variable.
As mentioned earlier references are great to use as function parameters.
When you first start out in C++ you might find it useful to think of a reference as a constant pointer
that's automatically dereferenced when you use it.
We've already seen using references as function parameters.
So let's see some other uses
references are often used in range based for loops to access collection elements inside each iteration.
Here's an example of arr. base for loop that does not use references.
In this case we have a vector of C++ string object's name Stooges and it's initialized to Larry Moe
and Curly.
Then we use a range based for loop to iterate through the vector at each iteration we assign funny to
each vector element.
Then we have another range base for loop that displays the contents of the Stooges vector.
Notice the output.
Nothing changed.
We didn't change the vector at all even though we assigned funny to each element in the loop.
So what's going on.
The problem is that the variable name in the first loop is a copy for each of the vector elements as
we loop through them.
So we're setting the copy to funny but we're never changing the actual elements in the vector.
Now let's see how we can use references to actually change the vector elements.
Here we have the same example except that the two are variable in the first loop is now a reference.
In this case a reference to each of the C++ string object's now is is an alias for those objects.
And when we assign funny to us here we're actually changing the vector elements.
You can see now that when we display the vector the elements in the vector have all indeed changed to
funny.
Notice what happens if we add the Konst qualifier to the loop variable in the first loop.
Now we're preventing any change to the data in the vector because the compiler marks it as read only.
So this code now gives us a compiler error.
This is not what we want since we really do want to modify the vector elements but you can see that
the compiler is doing exactly what you're asking it to do.
It makes sense for us to use the cost qualifier in the second loop the loop that actually displays the
vector elements.
Also by using a reference we're not incurring the costs of copying each vector element in each loop
iteration.
So in this case it makes sense to use the cons qualifier for the reference as TR in the loop when we're
displaying the vector elements.
So any attempt to change them would probably be a mistake.
So we can have the compiler help us out by making the reference Konst now any attempt to change the
vector element results in a compiler error.
Unless you have a specific reason to copy elements in range base for loops you should use reference
variables to make your code more efficient.
And if you are going to modify the collection elements make the reference Konst rather than go over
everything we already covered regarding using references as function parameters.
Please refer to the section 11 videos and examples where I go over the use of reference parameters in
functions in detail we'll head over to the ID now and see some of these examples in life code.
Ok so I'm in the IDM in the section 12 workspace and the references project and this is about as simple
and examples I can come up with for references.
So here I've got an integer called numb and I'm initializing it to 100.
And I've got a reference called ref that I'm initializing it to numb.
So ref is an alias too.
So if I display numb I'm going to get 100.
If I display ref I'm going to get 100 there aliases were in this case the reference is an alias to the
name.
OK.
So notice no dereferencing no nothing just use it straight as is.
And it's automatically going to be dereference behind the scenes.
It's basically a pointer.
That's how it's implemented.
Behind the scenes but all that's been abstracted away for you.
So in this case here I'm changing numb to 200 so I'm going straight to the variable and changing it
to 200.
So when I display name I'm going to get two hundred and one to splay the reference is an alias to the
number again I'm going to get 200 here.
I'm changing but I'm changing it through the reference.
So I'm setting it to 300 again.
There alias's So that's what you get.
Hopefully that's pretty easy to understand I think.
Now let's do another example.
That's based on the example that I did on the slides.
But before we do that let's run this.
So I build and run and you can see 100 100 200 200 300 300 just what we expected.
OK so now let's do an example of using reference parameters inside range based for loops just like we
did in the slides.
So let me clear that and I'll scroll up just a little bit and uncomment out this code right here.
And this is the code that worked on the vector of strings.
So here's where we're at.
We've got a vector of string objects right here on line 29 called Stooges and we're initializing it
to Larry Moe and Curly.
Then I've got a based for loop.
Now I remember the auto lets the compiler figure out what the type of s t r is.
In this case the collection of stooges and it's a vector of strings so as TR will be a string at each
generation and then what we're doing is we're saying it's funny.
So the idea is that or the what the programmer intended to do was to change.
Larry Moe and Curly too funny funny funny.
OK.
But it doesn't work.
The reason it doesn't work is because as TR is a copy.
So each time in we're making a copy of lairy a copy of Moe and a copy of Kerley so sure we're changing
the copy to funny but we're not changing any of these actuals to funny.
So what we can do is and if you notice we have a simple loop here that just displays them and when we
run this in a second you'll see that this will display Larry Moe and Curly.
OK so no changes at all just like we saw in the slides.
In this next example what we're doing is we're using a reference here you can see the ampersand.
So each iteration of the loop as TR will be a reference to the actual.
So now that as TR is going to be an alias for each one of these guys at each iteration of the loop.
So when we say ESR's funny now we're really replacing Larry Moe and Curly with funny funny funny.
So we come over here and display.
We're going to see funny funny funny.
OK.
So we'll run that in a second but the other thing we wanted to say was in this example here I'm displaying
those three string objects that are in the vector.
But in this case are making copies of them.
There's no danger in changing them right because I've got a copy of them so if I do change them like
I did here I'm changing the copy but I'm making copies.
So that's pretty inefficient in this case.
String objects are pretty efficient but it could be some user defined type where making a copy of it
could be pretty expensive.
You know you're allocating space and you're making a copy let's say a couple hundred thousand bytes
or something.
So it could be very very expensive operation.
In this case we want to pass that in by reference like we're doing here and but the danger with that
is that now we can change the elements right which we don't want.
So that's why we use the cost.
So this gives us the protection of making those elements Read-Only.
But it also allows them not to be copied.
In this case we're just going to create aliases to them so very efficient and pretty safe because we
can't change them.
OK so hopefully that makes sense.
Let me run this real quick.
And you could see the first time through and I've moved this slightly over here we've got there are
Larry Moe and Curly.
So we didn't change a thing we expected.
Funny funny funny.
We got Larry Moe and Curly.
Now we're using a reference.
We do indeed change the actual So now we see funny funny funny.
OK so give it a try.
Play around with these.
Try to create a reference to a pointer and see if you can figure out how that works.
All right.
So that's pretty much it for references remember I covered how to use reference parameters and how to
pass references to functions in Section 11.
There's a whole section there on using reference parameters and when you use constant so forth.
So I'll see you in the next video.